In this section,
we will learn about disk partitions.
Then we will look at file systems
such as the EXT series and NFS.
Then we will cover external storage devices
such as DAS,
NAS,
and SAN.
Finally,
we will wrap up the session
by seeing LVM in action.
Each of these topics is followed
by hands-on labs.
Let's start with some
of the basic concepts in storage.
First, we will take a look at block devices.
"Dave may have covered this
while talking about file types
but I would like to start off
with this, all the same,"
says Mohan.
He explains that a block device
is a type of file
that can be found under the /dev/ directory.
It usually represents a piece of hardware
that can store data.
Traditional spinning hard disk
or solid-state disk,
also called an SSD,
are examples of block storage in Linux.
It is called block storage
because data is read
or written to it in blocks
or chunks of space.
To see the list of block devices
in your system,
run the command lsblk.
You can also run an "ls-l" in the /dev/ directory
and look for files that have B
as the first character.
If you look at the result of lsblk command,
you will see that there is a disk called SDA
with about 119 gigabyte space.
This represents an entire disk.
Then there are devices SDA1 to SDA3
which are of type part.
These are disk partitions
which we will see next.
Before we move on to partitions,
observe that each block device
has a major and a minor number.
The major number,
which is the number eight in this example,
is used to identify the type of block device.
The value eight represents a SCSI device
which has a fixed naming convention
that starts with SD.
This is the reason why the disk
in the partition names start with SD.
The minor numbers
are used to distinguish individual,
physical or logical devices
which in this case
identify the whole disk
and the partitions created.
Mohan continues with his session.
The entire disk can be broken down
into smaller segments of usable space
called partitions.
In the example here,
we have three partitions for the SSD disk
represented by SDA1,
SDA2
and SDA3.
The concept of partitioning
allows us to segment space
and use each partition for a specific purpose.
If you inspect the result
of the lsblk command,
you will see that SDA3 partitions
are used for the root partition.
SDA2 partition
of size 72.5 gigabyte
is mounted at /media/MM/Data
which is used to store backups in this system.
SDA1 is consumed as a system partition
mounted at /boot/EFI
which is used during the system boot process
and contains the boot loaders
for the installed OS.
Make a note of the fact
that you don't necessarily have
to partition a disk.
It can be used as is
without carving out partitions.
However, it is always recommended
to partition a disk wherever possible
as it offers greater flexibility.
The information about partitions
is saved in a partition table.
This information can be read in many ways.
The lsblk command we saw just now
is one such way.
Another popular tool
is the Fdisk command.
It can be used
to list the partition table information
but can also be used to create
and delete partitions.
Use the Fdisk-L command
to print the partition table.
This will print the information
quite similar to the lsblk command
but also provides additional information
such as the partition type used,
the size of the disk in bytes,
and sectors.
Bob asks,
"What does the disk label type GPT stand for?"
Mohan replies,
"That's a good question.
We will look at that next
but first,
let's learn a bit about partition types."
Mohan continues with the session.
There are three types of disk partitions.
The primary partition
is a type of partition that can be used
to boot an operating system.
Traditionally, disks were limited
to not more than four
primary partitions per disk.
An extended partition
is a type of partition
that cannot be used on its own
but can host logical partitions.
With the restriction
of maximum four primary partitions,
you can opt to create extended partitions
and carve out logical partitions inside it.
Essentially, an extended partition
is like a disk drive in its own right.
It has a partition table that points
to one or more logical partitions.
Logical partitions are those created
within an extended partition.
How a disk is partitioned
is defined by a partitioning scheme
also known as a partition table.
What we just saw in the previous slide
is an MBR partitioning scheme.
MBR stands for the Master Boot Record
and has been around for over 30 years now.
As we just saw,
there can only be four primary partitions
in MBR.
Secondly, the maximum size per disc
is two terabytes.
If you want more than four partitions
per disk,
we would need to create the fourth partition
as an extended partition
and carve out logical partitions within it.
GPT stands for G-U-I-D partition table
and is a more recent partitioning scheme
that was created to address
the limitations in MBR.
Theoretically, GPT
can have an unlimited
number of partitions per disc.
This is usually only limited
by the restrictions
imposed by the operating system itself.
For example,
RHEL only allows 128 partitions per disc.
Additionally,
the disc size limitation of two terabyte
does not exist with GPT.
Unless the operating system you want
to install on the disc requires MBR,
GPT is always the best choice
when it comes to selecting
a partitioning scheme.
"Let's now get some hands-on practice",
says Mohan.
He provides Bob access
to one of his lab machines.
He continues,
"This system has a disc that is not partitioned
or mounted in the system.
I want you to identify it."
Bob takes control
and runs the lsblk command straight away.
He sees two whole discs
SDA
which has partitions
and SDB
which does not appear to have any partitions.
"SDB?"
Bob asks.
"Correct",
says Mohan.
Mohan then proceeds to show Bob
how to create partition on the SDB disk.
To do this,
run the Gdisc command
with the device path as the argument.
Gdisc is an improved version of the Fdisk
that works with the GPT partition table.
This will take you
into a menu-driven interface.
Once in,
use the question mark character
to print all available options.
Now type the N key to create a new partition.
We want to create a partition number one
with the size of 20 gigabytes
which is the entire disk space.
Once you have selected the partition size,
it will ask you for a hex code
for the partition type.
Stick to the default of Linux file system
which has a code of 8,300.
You can now type in the L-key
to see all possible values.
Once you provide the necessary information,
use the W command
to write the partition table.
This will create a new partition called
/dev/SDB1.
To check the status of the new partition,
run the lsblk or fdisk-l command.
You can see the partition table
using the Gdisk-l command as well.
Now that you have learned
about disks and partitions,
head over to the hands-on labs
and troubleshoot why Bob's system
is not displaying
the entire size of the physical disk.